
Hydrocarbon processing involves a series of chemical and
heat processes to convert raw materials into an array of essential products such as gasoline, kerosene,olefins, rubber, and plastics. At the heart of these processes are Fired Heaters, commonly called furnaces.
Fired heaters are used to heat the process fluid
to the desired temperature. The fired heaters are used with many processes including distillation, reforming, olefins manufacturing and hydrocracking. As the operator, it is your responsibility to operate your furnaces as efficiently and safely as possible.
Efficient furnace operations have become a major
concern with the rising cost of fuel. Today, the fuel for processing is about two third of the total utility cost. Most of this fuel is used in Fired Heaters.
Environmental regulations have also made it
necessary to closely monitor emissions from furnaces and other processing equipment.

 As you know, the fired
heaters, often referred to as furnace, is an equipment used in process industry to heat process fluids to the desired temperature by
the burning of the fuel.
Before going to the details
of the fired heater, let us learn about the basic
principle of combustion and heat transfer involved in the
working of a fired heater.


HEAT TRANSFER AND COMBUSTION

Basics of Heat Transfer
Fired heaters or furnaces
are used to transfer heat. Heat is produced by the combustion of fuel at the burners. This heat is then transferred to the process fluid that circulates through the tubes of the furnace.
There are three methods of heat transfer:
RADIATION
CONVECTION
CONDUCTION


1. Radiation
Radiation is how heat is transferred
from the sun to the earth. Radiant heat travels in waves as light does.
For this type of heat transfer to
occur, the object being heated must be in direct line of sight with the source of heat.
As with visible light, these radiant
heat waves can be reflected.
Similarly, in a furnace, radiation
takes place in radiant tubes, present in the radiation section. The radiation section is where the tubes receive almost all
its heat by radiation from the flame. These tubes are exposed
to direct heat from the burner.
Radiation is the transfer
of energy from a heat source to objects in its path through space.
It does not require any material medium for its propagation and may also occur
through the vacuum.
Radiant Tubes   	

2. Convection
Warm air out
The second method of
heat transfer is convection. Convection involves the flow of gas or liquid to carry heat.
A central heating system is a
typical example of heat transfer by convection. This type of heat
transfer distributes heat throughout
a room with a flow of hot gases.
Cool air in
Similarly, convective heat
transfer in a furnace takes place in convection tubes. These tubes are located above and out of sight of the burner. As hot gas rises through the furnace they transfer heat to these tubes.
Heat transfer happens due to the bulk movement of fluids
and molecular collision.
Convection Tubes


3. Conduction
The third method of heat transfer is
conduction. When a metal rod is held in a candle flame, the heat goes from the
candle to the hand through the metal rod. This process of heat transfer without the
movement of particles is called conduction.
Metal Rod
The amount of heat transfer is proportional
to the material of the body, the surface area of the body, and the temperature
difference. Conduction is the most significant
means of heat transfer in solids.
Similarly, heat travels through the
tube wall to the process flow by conduction. Heat travels from the
Conduction
outer surface of the tube wall to
the inner surface by conduction.
Process Liquid
Note that heat reaches the outer
surface of the tube either by radiation or convection. It reaches the inner surface of the tube by
Heat
conduction. Then a convection current
is set up that transfers the heat throughout the liquid in the tube.
Tube Wall



Basics of Combustion
How is heat produced in a furnace?
This is accomplished by a chemical reaction called combustion.
Combustion is an exothermic reaction
where heat is released due to the reaction.
The presence of oxygen in the exhaust
and the absence of fuel particles in the exhaust indicate complete combustion.
Rapid chemical reaction occurs when
the proper amounts of fuel and oxygen are combined with an ignition source to release heat and exhaust.

Combustion
Combustion is the breakdown of a compound in combination with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water with the release of energy in the form of heat.

Carbon dioxide and water are the combustion products for a complete combustion reaction.

For combustion to occur, three components must be present
at the same time and in the proper proportions.

Fuel

Oxygen

Ignition


Fuel
Fuel can be either gas, liquid or solid. Furnaces are designed in such a way that the fuel may be burned either in liquid or gas form. The fuel used in a fired heater may be natural gas, fuel oil or a combination of gas and oil.
Natural gas is preferred in
many installations because it is cleaner and burns more consistently than oil.
Typical Natural Gas flame
Typical Fuel Oil flame
Oxygen
Air is needed for combustion because it provides oxygen which acts as oxidant that reacts with the fuel to produce the heat. A candle placed inside a closed glass will stop burn once the oxygen is finished.
Ignition
The final thing needed for combustion is a source of ignition. The ignition source provides the heat energy that is
required to start the combustion reaction.
Once the combustion is started, the heat produced from it is used for the
propagation of combustion chain reaction.


Air - Fuel Ratio
In the operation of a fired heater, it is
important to maintain the right proportion of fuel to air. The exact amount of
air for the complete combustion of
a fuel is called stoichiometric air.
When this is done properly,
combustion will be complete and the maximum amount of heat will be generated without any fuel waste.

Optimum Excess Air for a Furnace

One of the challenges to the operator is to provide enough oxygen	
to the furnace to allow complete combustion, while at the same time	
minimizing excess oxygen to assure efficient use of fuel.


Complete and Incomplete Combustion
Under perfect conditions, fuel combines
exactly with the right amount of oxygen to allow complete or stoichiometric combustion without any unburned fuel or excess oxygen.
But in reality, the combustion is complex
and some excess air is always needed to guarantee complete fuel combustion.
If not, substantial amounts of carbon monoxide are produced, reducing
efficiency and increasing pollution levels.


Incomplete combustion occurs when there is not enough oxygen available to burn all the fuel. When this happens, unburned fuel can accumulate in the furnace, which is a potentially dangerous situation. It may lead to an explosion.